Add guide for Grafana dashboards (#37257)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/guides/observability/grafana-dashboards.adoc

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="{project_name} Grafana dashboards"
summary="Learn how to import {project_name} provided Grafana dashboards to your Grafana instance" >

{project_name} provides metrics to observe what is happening inside the deployment.
To understand how metrics evolve over time, it is helpful to collect them and visualize in graphs.

This guide provides instructions on how to visualize collected {project_name} metrics in a running Grafana instance.

== Prerequisites

* {project_name} metrics are enabled. Follow <@links.observability id="configuration-metrics"/> {section} for more details.
* Grafana instance is running and {project_name} metrics are collected into a Prometheus instance.

> == Keycloak Grafana dashboards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== {project_name} Grafana dashboards
```

Grafana dashboards are distributed in form of a JSON file that is imported into a Grafana instance.
JSON definitions of {project_name} Grafana dashboards are available in the following https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-grafana-dashboard[Github repository].

Follow these steps to download JSON file definitions.

. Identify the branch from `keycloak-grafana-dashboards` to use from the following table.
+

> |===

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should be described in the README.md of the repository as this docs might be eventually for an older release, and then `main` would have continued to evolve for a different release.

Author: I was thinking about this as well. My reasoning to put it here is that I assume it won't change very often and would be better to have everything in one place rather than documenting it in the repo. We most probably won't make any breaking changes at least until KC27. Also, I think the way how the mapping works may change in the future, for example, we will have different mapping per dashboard. Do you still think it makes sense to move it?

Reviewer: Thanks, I think it's okay to keep it here for now.

|{project_name} version |`keycloak-grafana-dashboards` branch

|>= 26.1
|`main`
|===

. Clone the GitHub repository
+
----
git clone -b BRANCH_FROM_STEP_1 https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-grafana-dashboard.git
----
. The dashboards are available in the directory `keycloak-grafana-dashboard/dashboards`.

> Below is the list of available dashboards and their purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following section describes the purpose of the available dashboards.
```

> === Keycloak troubleshooting dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== {project_name} troubleshooting dashboard
```

This dashboard is available in the JSON file: `keycloak-troubleshooting-dashboard.json`.

> On the top of the dashboard, there are graphs displaying the service level indicators as defined in <@links.observability id="keycloak-service-level-indicators"/>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the top of the dashboard, graphs display the service level indicators as defined in <@links.observability id="keycloak-service-level-indicators"/>.
```

> It can be also used while troubleshooting {project_name} deployment following the <@links.observability id="metrics-for-troubleshooting"/> {section}, for example, when SLI graphs do not show expected results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This dashboard can be also used while troubleshooting a {project_name} deployment following the <@links.observability id="metrics-for-troubleshooting"/> {section}, for example, when SLI graphs do not show expected results.
```

> A screenshot of this dashboard:
> 
> image::observability/keycloak-troubleshooting-grafana-dashboard.png[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Keycloak troubleshooting dashboard
image::observability/keycloak-troubleshooting-grafana-dashboard.png[]
```

=== Keycloak capacity planning dashboard

This dashboard is available in the JSON file: `keycloak-capacity-planning-dashboard.json`.

This dashboard shows metrics important when estimating the load handled by {project_name} deployment.
For example, it shows the number of password validations or login flows performed by {project_name}.
To learn more about these metrics proceed to the following {section} <@links.observability id="metrics-for-troubleshooting-keycloak"/>.

> WARNING: It is necessary to enable {project_name} event metrics for this dashboard to work correctly. Proceed to the following {section} <@links.observability id="event-metrics"/> to enable them.
> 
> A screenshot of this dashboard:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE:  {project_name} event metrics must be enabled for this dashboard to work correctly.  To enable them, see the {section} <@links.observability id="event-metrics"/>.

.Keycloak capacity planning dashboard
```

image::observability/keycloak-capacity-planning-dashboard.png[]

== Import a dashboard

> To import a dashboard, follow these steps:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

. Open the dashboard page from the left Grafana menu.
. Click *New* and *Import*.

> . Click *Upload dashboard JSON file* and pick the JSON file of the dashboard you want to import.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *Upload dashboard JSON file* and select the JSON file of the dashboard you want to import.
```

. Pick your Prometheus datasource.
. Click *Import*.

== Export a dashboard

> Exporting a dashboard may be useful, for example, if you want to suggest a change in our dashboard repository.
> Follow these steps to export a dashboard to JSON format.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exporting a dashboard to JSON format may be useful. For example, you may want to suggest a change in our dashboard repository.

```

. Open a dashboard you would like to export.

> . Click the share button in the top left corner next to the name of the dashboard.
> . Change tab to *Export*.
> . Enable the option *Export for sharing externally*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click *share* in the top left corner next to the dashboard name.
. Click the *Export* tab.
. Enable *Export for sharing externally*.
```

> . Then either click on *Save to file* or click on *View JSON* and *Copy to Clipboard* depending on where you want to store the resulting JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click either *Save to file* or *View JSON* and *Copy to Clipboard* based on where you want to store the resulting JSON.
```
